Environment Provisioning (#31)
redhat-appstudio/book: ADR/adr-0008-environment-provisioning.md

# ADR-0008 Environment Provisioning

Date: 2022-12-14

## Status

> Accepted

Author: Not actually accepted yet. Pending review in this PR.

> ## Approvers

Author: These people haven't actually approved yet. Will seek their approval before merging.

## Decision

We are going to emulate storage management APIs (see [persistent-volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) and [design.md](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner/blob/master/doc/design.md) for reference).

### CRDs

#### DeploymentTarget (DT)

A deployment target, usually a K8s api endpoint. The credentials for connecting to the target will
be stored in a secret which will be referenced in the clusterCredentialsSecret field. A [DT] Can be
created manually by a user, or dynamically using a provisioner.

**Immutable object**: no

**Scope**: namespace

```yaml
apiVersion: appstudio.redhat.com/v1alpha1
kind: DeploymentTarget
metadata:
    name: prod-dt
spec:
    deploymentTargetClassName: isolation-level-namespace
    kubernetesCredentials:

>         defaultNamespace: team-a--prod-dtc

Reviewer: Just out of curiosity, what does this naming convention mean? I assume team-a is just an imaginary org; what's the rest?

Author: Yeah, the convention isn't important, in that nothing depends on parsing this. It could be a uuid or something similar. It just needs to be unique.

But, as the doc was coming together, I was assuming that this would be put together from the `<name of the user's appstudio namespace>--<name of the deploymenttargetclaim in the user's appstudio namespace that caused the new deployment namespace to be created>`

    name: isolation-level-namespace
spec:
    provisioner: appstudio.redhat.com/devsandbox
    parameters: {}
    reclaimPolicy: Delete
```

#### Environment

[Environment] objects refer to a [DTC] using the `deploymentTargetClaim`
field. The environment controller will wait for the [DTC] to get to the
“bound” phase, once it is bound, it will reach the [DT] and read the
target's connection details from the kubernetesCredentials field and
configure Argo/Gitops services to use them.

**Immutable object**: no

**Scope**: namespace

```yaml
apiVersion: appstudio.redhat.com/v1alpha1
kind: Environment
metadata:
    name: prod
spec:
    displayName: “Production for Team A”
    deploymentStrategy: AppStudioAutomated
    parentEnvironment: staging
    tags: [prod]
    configuration:
        target:
            deploymentTargetClaim:
                claimName: prod-dtc
```

### Controllers

#### DeploymentTargetBinder

Binds [DeploymentTargetClaim] to a [DeploymentTarget] that satisfies its requirements.

It watches for the creation of new [DTC] and tries to find a matching [DT] for each one of them.

A [DT] that we created dynamically for a specific [DTC] will always be attached to it.

> [DT] and [DTC] have one to one bindings.

Reviewer: What would this look like if we had multiple workspaces using the same cluster? Would you create multiple deployment targets for the same cluster?
And if we had multiple environments using the same cluster within a workspace, would we also have multiple deployment targets for that cluster?

Author: In terms of the user's appstudio namespace where the DT and the DTC live, there is also a Secret that contains the kubeconfig-formatted serviceaccount token to admin the deployment namespace. It is no more persistent than an ordinary Secret in k8s.

##### Binding Loop (DTC Reconciliation)

![](../diagrams/ADR-0008/binding-controller.jpg)

#### DeploymentTargetProvisioner

Watch for the creation of a new [DTC]. If the [DTCLS] of the [DTC] matches a [DTCLS] the provisioner was
configured for, it reads the parameters from that class, provisions the target and creates a [DT]
object which references the [DTC] that started the process.

When a [DTC] is deleted, if it was bound to a [DT] created by the provisioner, it reclaims the [DT] and
the actual cluster that was created for it based on the reclaimPolicy configuration.

##### Provision Loop (DTC Reconciliation)

![](../diagrams/ADR-0008/provision-loop.jpg)

##### Deprovision Loop (DT Reconciliation)

![](../diagrams/ADR-0008/deprovision-loop.jpg)

#### EnvironmentController

> TODO - anything to write about the Environment controller?

Author: @gbenhaim I think this section got omitted in the original doc.

### DeploymentTarget(DT) and DeploymentTargetClaim(DTC) Lifecycle

![](../diagrams/ADR-0008/dt-dtc-lifecycle.jpg)

### Access Matrix

| *User,Controller/CRD* | **DT**                | **DTC**               | **DTCLS** | **Environment**      |
|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------|----------------------|
| **Binder**            | watch/list/get/update | watch/list/get/update |           |                      |

> | **Provionser**        | create/delete         | watch                 | get       |                      |

Reviewer: What has the ability to create/delete/update DTCLS?

Reviewer: typo: Provisioner

Author: Only we (appstudio administrators) would create new DTCLS resources when we want to make a new kind of deployment target available for automatic provisioning.

Author: > typo: Provisioner

Fixed.

| AnnBoundByController      | dt.appstudio.redhat.com/bound-by-controller    | "yes"                   | Binding controller | DTC          | Indicates that the binding controller bind the DTC to a DT. In practice it means that the controller set the DTC.spec.VolumeName to the value of DT.Name |
| AnnDynamicallyProvisioned | provionser.appstudio.redhat.com/provisioned-by | A name of a provisioner | Provisioner        | DT           | Indicates that the provisioner whose name appears in the value provisioned the DT.                                                                       |

### Finalizer details

| Const Name in code | Key                                       | Applied by  | Applied on | Purpose                                                                       |
|--------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| finalizerDT        | provionser.appstudio.redhat.com/finalizer | Provisioner | DT         | Delays the deletion of a DT so the provisioner can free up external resources |

### Use Case Descriptions

> - **During onboarding** - when a user requests a new appstudio tier namespace, the tier template includes two [Environments], and two [DTCs]. The [Environments] reference the [DTCs]. The [DTCs] bear a request for the “devsandbox” [DTCLS]. The devsandbox provisioner responds to that request and generates a SpaceRequest, ultimately resulting in a new namespace for each environment. The SpaceRequest is marked ready by the spacerequest controller. The devsandbox deployment target provisioner controller sees that and marks the devsandbox [DT] as ready. The deployment target binder sees that, and attaches the new [DTs] to the [DTCs]. The environment controller sees this and marks the [Environments] as ready.

Reviewer 2: do we need to elaborate on what it means to mark the environment as ready?

Author: I think we went back and forth about whether or not to propagate things from the DTC and the DT back to the Environment. What entity will be waiting for that status on the Environment? I'm not sure we have a consumer for that. If no consumer, then perhaps we can drop this sentence.

Author: Updated in a4349a4fb0fb28ece4c2a1a5401c91c29b568065

- The design is similar to the design of storage in k8s, so it should look familiar to developers and users.
- We have a larger API surface than we might ultimately need. Users won’t experience this in the UI, but API-based users will face apparent complexity. The fact that this design emulates the concepts in the k8s storage API should reduce the cognitive load this might impose on users and our engineers.

## Phases of implementation

A addendum about what features can be left out until later iterations.

### Phase 0 (Path to MVP)

- At minimum, create the CRDs and make them available, with no binder or provisioner controllers behind them.
- Next, modify the Environment CRD and teach the gitops service how to navigate from the linked [DTC] to the [DT] in order to find the Secret that it needs for Argo.

Minimal functionality looks like the BYOC case: No provisioners
necessary - and even the binder can be omitted in this first pass.

- On workspace initialization, have the NsTemplateTier:
  - Create Spaces with fixed -dev and -stage suffixes manually as a part of the appstudio tier
  - Create serviceaccounts with rolebindings to administer the namespaces

>   - Create [DeploymentTargets] to match and reference Secrets that will be created to contains tokens for the serviceaccounts in the previous steps.

Author: Note, we need to resolve this blocker around Phase 0 here. It doesn't appear to be possible using only static tier templates to get the token from one namespace and make it available as a Secret in another namespace.

Reviewer: This is something I was starting to get at above.  It feels like we need something else that's storing the cluster data so we can re-use clusters across multiple workspaces.  For the new-user workspace initialization, we need to copy the information about the Sandbox cluster into the various DeploymentTargets.

Later when a tenant can have multiple workspaces, the workspaces for a single tenant will often share clusters. We shouldn't require users to re-enter BYOC information for every workspace.  We need to be able to define the cluster information once at the tenant level and copy or share that information across multiple workspaces.

Reviewer 2: I assume that a `tenant` equals a user. If so, in order to allow sharing BYOC clusters between workspaces, we will have to associate them with the user that added them to Stonesoup, otherwise, BYOC clusters can leak between workspaces. For example:

Alice is part of workspace A
Bob is part of workspaces, A and B
Alice adds cluster C to workspace A
Can Bob use cluster C in workspace B?

Reviewer 3: For tenants, orgs etc we will have to introduce workspace hierarchy when we can store shared resources like DTC/DT on the parent workspace level.

@ralphbean the problem with creating DTs with a secret reference via tier templates is a pretty big problem. I'm not sure we can work it around without introducing very ugly stonesoup specific hacks in the sandbox core code for MVP.

Author: On the problem of creating the secret reference in the appstudio namespace, to me, the choice is between these two:

* Do we invent and accept some hack to make Phase 0 happen?
* Do we ignore Phase 0 and go straight for Phase 1? We can avoid spending time on a temporary hack, but will delay MVP.

To resolve that, we need some estimate of how long the SpaceRequest implementation will take - which looks like the biggest item in Phase 1.

Author: OK - an update from conversation today with @alexeykazakov and @MatousJobanek

* What we have right now for the Environment API technically works for static environments for MVP target.
* Argo has a privileged service account that it can use to manage any namespace on the cluster.
* We can defer rolling out this new Environments API until after MVP. We will essentially combine the steps from Phase 0 and Phase 1 into a larger Phase 1.

Author: Updated in 5469aeb.

spec:
    provisioner: appstudio.redhat.com/hypershift
    parameters:
        numOfNodes: 3
    reclaimPolicy: Delete
    allowTargetResourceExpansion: false
```

Hypershift cluster with 6 nodes example:

```yaml
apiVersion: appstudio.redhat.com/v1alpha1
kind: DeploymentTargetClass
metadata:
    name: isolation-level-cluster-large
spec:
    provisioner: appstudio.redhat.com/hypershift
    parameters:
        numOfNodes: 6
    reclaimPolicy: Delete
    allowTargetResourceExpansion: false
```

## References

- [Discussion recording, 2022-12-07](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1UWIefLzFb2rYnz8mvvWkNKJyuWy-_nhm/view)
- [Original drafting in googledoc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vFD5lDbxek_Q2RZyKdFuZ8z0xYubOA1i8cu2K7KNxaQ/edit#heading=h.k2fng7c0dm7k)
- [Original miro](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVP77ztI4=)
- [Issue tracking creation of this ADR (STONE-174)](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/STONE-174)

[Environment]: ../ref/application-environment-api.md#environment
[Environments]: ../ref/application-environment-api.md#environment
[DT]: ../ref/application-environment-api.md#deploymenttarget
[DTs]: ../ref/application-environment-api.md#deploymenttarget

> [DeploymentTarget]: ../ref/application-environment-api.md#deploymenttarget

Author: This url anchor won't be valid until something actually gets implemented in the application-api repo.

- For the second purpose of **provisioning a new deployment target** we are going to introduce a new [DeploymentTarget] and [DeploymentTargetClaim] API, which will be referenced from an [Environment].

The new [DeploymentTarget] API is designed to emulate storage management APIs (see [persistent-volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) and [storage provisioner design](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner/blob/master/doc/design.md) for reference).

### CRDs

#### DeploymentTarget (DT)

A deployment target, usually a K8s api endpoint. The credentials for connecting to the target will
be stored in a secret which will be referenced in the clusterCredentialsSecret field. A [DT] Can be
created manually by a user, or dynamically using a provisioner. The `phase` section shows the lifecycle phase of the [DT].

**Immutable object**: no

**Scope**: namespace

```yaml
apiVersion: appstudio.redhat.com/v1alpha1
kind: DeploymentTarget
metadata:
    name: prod-dt
spec:
    deploymentTargetClassName: isolation-level-namespace
    kubernetesCredentials:
        defaultNamespace: team-a--prod-dtc
        apiURL: …

>         clusterCredentialsSecret: team-a--prod-dtc--secret

Author: A reference to a Secret, containing a single `kubeconfig` key, value pair.

    claimRef:
        name: prod-dtc
status:
    phase: Bound

```

Phases:

**Pending:** DT is not yet available for binding.

**Available:** DT waits for a Claim to be bound to.

**Bound:** The DT was bounded to a DTC.

**Released:** The DT was previously bound to a DTC which got deleted. external resources were not freed.

**Failed:** DT was released from its claim, but there was a failure during the release of external resources.

#### DeploymentTargetClaim (DTC)

Represents a request for a [DeploymentTarget]. The `phase` section shows the lifecycle phase of the [DTC].

**Immutable object**: no

**Scope**: namespace

```yaml
apiVersion: appstudio.redhat.com/v1alpha1
kind: DeploymentTargetClaim
metadata:
    name: prod-dtc

> spec:

Author: No `selector` support as it is currently designed. As designed:

* A StorageClass references exactly one *provider*. Multiple StorageClasses can reference the same provider.
* A DeploymentTargetClaim references exactly one StorageClass, by name in the `deploymentTargetClassName`.

With selection, I suppose you could claim a target matching _any_ storage class or (as you suggest) claim a target matching any of the storage classes that provide cluster-level isolation (but not those that provide only namespace isolation).

---

In the current design, the binding controller sets an annotation on the DTC with the provisioner it found on the associated StorageClass. Provisioners only process DTCs annotated for them.

If we added a `storageClassSelector` field later in addition to the `storageClassName, we could add support for processing that selection in the binding controller. I hesitate to add it now, to avoid adding any more complexity to the initial design than necessary.

- Opens the possibility to create [DeploymentTargetClaims] in advance and by that reducing the waiting time for an ephemeral environment for testing.
- The design is similar to the design of storage in k8s, so it should look familiar to developers and users.
- We have a larger API surface than we might ultimately need. Users won’t experience this in the UI, but API-based users will face apparent complexity. The fact that this design emulates the concepts in the k8s storage API should reduce the cognitive load this might impose on users and our engineers.

## Phases of implementation

A addendum about what features can be left out until later iterations.

### Phase 0 (Path to MVP)

- At minimum, create the CRDs and make them available, with no binder or provisioner controllers behind them.
- Next, modify the Environment CRD and teach the gitops service how to navigate from the linked [DTC] to the [DT] in order to find the Secret that it needs for Argo.

Minimal functionality looks like the BYOC case: No provisioners
necessary - and even the binder can be omitted in this first pass.

- On workspace initialization, have the NsTemplateTier:

>   - Create Spaces with fixed -dev and -stage suffixes manually as a part of the appstudio tier

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Create Namespaces with fixed -dev and -stage suffixes manually as a part of the appstudio tier. So every provisioned workspace/space has three namespaces. The main user namespace and two -dev and -stage for environments.
```

  - Create [DeploymentTargets] to match and reference Secrets that will be created to contains tokens for the serviceaccounts in the previous steps.
  - Create [DeploymentTargetClaims] to match.
  - Create [Environments] to match.
- As long as the secret names generated by the SpaceRequests are predictable, then it should be possible to specify all of these objects up front.

### Phase 1 (Service Preview)

The result of this phase is an automation that binds [DT] and [DTC] and automatically provisioned
environment on the Sandbox cluster (using the [SpaceRequest
API](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uqgghk1lN9dyoBLsvn5YD443TwKrsKHU6fvfUuo84Hs/edit#)) and
creates a [DT].

The following controllers should be implemented:

- Binding controller.
- Sandbox provisioner.
- Adjusting the integration service controller to create and delete a [DTC]

### Phase 2 (need more grooming and clear requirement from the PM)

The result of this phase is the ability to specify parametes that are
needed from the deployment target, such has memory, CPU, CPU
architecture and the number of nodes.

- The [DT], [DTC] an [DTCLS] would need to extended to support the new parameters.

>   - **DTCLS - allowTargetResourceExpansion** - represents whether or not the underlying provisioner allows targets to be resized. I.e., for a whole cluster provided by the "hypershift" ocm provider - can it have its number or size of nodes increased without having to delete it and create a new one.

Author: It's not important at all for early Phases. We suspect it might be useful in future phases, in the same way that it's useful to be able to scale up a PVC requested size for storageClasses that support it. However - there are a lot more kinds of parameters here for "size" than for storage. (Think limits vs requests vs node count vs node size and more..). We originally had a sketch of how that might work but it needs its own followup ADR to explore it fully. "Needs more grooming and input from PM."

# ADR-0008 Environment Provisioning

Date: 2022-12-14

## Status

Accepted

## Approvers

* Alexey Kazakhov
* Ann Marie Fred
* Elson Yuen
* Gorkem Ercan
* Jonathan West
* Krunoslav Pavic
* Scott Hebert
* Shoubhik Bose

## Authors

* Gal Ben Haim
* Ralph Bean

## Context

In our old KCP architecture, we had [a
design](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WKd1FVHAxaNQKCIzIW-vUQRgsoOP9T-8rYozAMDpYc0/edit#) for
provisioning a new deployment target in support of new [Environments].  This design was to be
implemented in [GITOPSRVCE-228](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/GITOPSRVCE-228) by an environment
controller that would create and manage sub-workspaces of the user’s main AppStudio workspace, and
that would provide a serviceaccount to Argo in order to deploy the user’s application to those
sub-workspaces. Now, without KCP, we need a new design.

> The [Environment] CR serves two purposes:

Reviewer 4: Is `Environment` supposed to be a link ?

Author: It is. The link references are at the _very_ end of the file.

- The [Environment] will still represent the first purpose of requesting that HAS and the GitOps service **recognize a new deployment destination**.
- For the second purpose of **provisioning a new deployment target** we are going to introduce a new [DeploymentTarget] and [DeploymentTargetClaim] API, which will be referenced from an [Environment].

The new [DeploymentTarget] API is designed to emulate storage management APIs (see [persistent-volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) and [storage provisioner design](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner/blob/master/doc/design.md) for reference).

### CRDs

#### DeploymentTarget (DT)

A deployment target, usually a K8s api endpoint. The credentials for connecting to the target will
be stored in a secret which will be referenced in the clusterCredentialsSecret field. A [DT] Can be
created manually by a user, or dynamically using a provisioner. The `phase` section shows the lifecycle phase of the [DT].

**Immutable object**: no

**Scope**: namespace

```yaml
apiVersion: appstudio.redhat.com/v1alpha1
kind: DeploymentTarget
metadata:
    name: prod-dt
spec:

>     deploymentTargetClassName: isolation-level-namespace

Author: It is because in the general case, the `binder` controller's job is to find matching DTs for DTCs, and bind them together. In theory, a DT could be pre-created but sitting around idle. You should be able to create a DTC that requests a certain kind of DT. If there is an existing DT that matches and if it is not yet bound to any other DTCs, then the binder controller should bind _it_ to the DTC.

In order to do that matching, DTs need to declare what storage class they are created from. I.e., if the DTC wants `isolation-level-namespace`, binding controller needs to look for any unbound DTs that provide `isolation-level-namespace`.

>     deploymentTargetClassName: isolation-level-namespace

Reviewer 4: Got it, sounds very reasonable to me.

    kubernetesCredentials:
        defaultNamespace: team-a--prod-dtc
        apiURL: …
        clusterCredentialsSecret: team-a--prod-dtc--secret
    claimRef:
        name: prod-dtc
status:
    phase: Bound

```

Phases:

**Pending:** DT is not yet available for binding.

**Available:** DT waits for a Claim to be bound to.

**Bound:** The DT was bounded to a DTC.

**Released:** The DT was previously bound to a DTC which got deleted. external resources were not freed.

> **Failed:** DT was released from its claim, but there was a failure during the release of external resources.

Reviewer 5: Is the failure to release the only case that will cause it in the failed phase? What about the failed case where DT failed during creation in the first place, e.g. secret is incorrect?

Author: I think in that case, the DT should not have been created by the provisioner at all. Instead, the provisioner should emit an `Event` complaining that it cannot create a DT that is being requested by a DTC for some reason - it should describe the reason in the Event.

field. The environment controller will wait for the [DTC] to get to the
`bound` phase, once it is bound, it will reach the [DT] and read the
target's connection details from the kubernetesCredentials field and
configure Argo/Gitops services to use them.

**Immutable object**: no

**Scope**: namespace

```yaml
apiVersion: appstudio.redhat.com/v1alpha1
kind: Environment
metadata:
    name: prod
spec:
    displayName: “Production for Team A”
    deploymentStrategy: AppStudioAutomated
    parentEnvironment: staging
    tags: [prod]
    configuration:
        target:
            deploymentTargetClaim:
                claimName: prod-dtc
```

### Controllers

#### DeploymentTargetBinder

Binds [DeploymentTargetClaim] to a [DeploymentTarget] that satisfies its requirements.

It watches for [DTC] and objects and tries to find a matching [DT] for each one of them. In addition, it's responsible for updating the `Status` sections of the [DT] and [DTC] (it also watches [DTC] objects). It marks [DTC] objects that requires dynamic provisioning.

A [DT] that was created dynamically for a specific [DTC] will always be attached to it.

> [DT] and [DTC] have one to one bindings.

Reviewer 5: I think it make sense to have DTC only maps to one DT. Is there any case where we can have more than one DTC maps to the same DT?

Author: I don't have a concrete use case at the moment. We can perhaps imagine a use case where there is some single fixed cluster that we want to make available to multiple teams. We might hope to model the cluster as one DT and then let multiple DTCs be bound to it.

Or, instead maybe the single cluster should get multiple DTs created for it and the multiple DTCs should bind exclusively to each of those. This would at least encourage a model where the multiple DTCs do not share a Secret reference (of course, I guess they could all use the same Secret name - but at least the model encourages that kind of separation).

Reviewer 2: At this point, I don't see a reason to have a one-to-many relationship between a DT and a DTC. If we want to use a different namespace on a target cluster, each namespace can be represented with its own DT.

##### Binding Loop (DTC Reconciliation)

![](../diagrams/ADR-0008/binding-controller.jpg)

#### DeploymentTargetProvisioner

Watch for [DTC] objects. If the [DTC] was marked for a dynamic provisioning by the provisioner, it reads the parameters from the [DTCLS] mentioned in the [DTC], provisions the target and creates a [DT]
object which references the [DTC] that started the process.

When a [DTC] is deleted, if it was bound to a [DT] created by the provisioner, it reclaims the [DT] and
the actual cluster that was created for it based on the reclaimPolicy configuration.

##### Provision Loop (DTC Reconciliation)

![](../diagrams/ADR-0008/provision-loop.jpg)

##### Deprovision Loop (DT Reconciliation)

![](../diagrams/ADR-0008/deprovision-loop.jpg)

#### EnvironmentController

Watch for [Environment] objects. If the [Environment] references a [DTC] that is `Bound` and that
[DTC] references a [DT] that contains a `spec.kubernetesCredentials.clusterCredentialsSecret` field,

> then ensure that there exists a [GitOpsDeploymentManagedEnvironment] resource that also references

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to have two different API's with a controller that bridges between them rather than a single API that will create a coupling between the controllers. It's expected that in the future the DT will contain more details about the cluster/namespace it represents, for example, its CPU architecture, and I don't think that this information should interest the GitopsService.

> then ensure that there exists a [GitOpsDeploymentManagedEnvironment] resource that also references

Reviewer 4: Thank you @gbenhaim, fair point.

The reason I feel having many APIs which wrap cluster credentials is that there is a long-term API-maintenance overhead even though short-term it is quicker to get things done. 

The description of a Kubernetes deployment target (Cluster properties and cluster credentials) would always be the same - with a subset of properties being optional.

| AnnBoundByController      | dt.appstudio.redhat.com/bound-by-controller    | "yes"                   | Binding controller | DTC          | Indicates that the binding controller bind the DTC to a DT. In practice it means that the controller set the DTC.spec.VolumeName to the value of DT.Name |
| AnnDynamicallyProvisioned | provionser.appstudio.redhat.com/provisioned-by | A name of a provisioner | Provisioner        | DT           | Indicates that the provisioner whose name appears in the value provisioned the DT.                                                                       |

### Finalizer details

| Const Name in code | Key                                       | Applied by  | Applied on | Purpose                                                                       |
|--------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| finalizerDT        | provionser.appstudio.redhat.com/finalizer | Provisioner | DT         | Delays the deletion of a DT so the provisioner can free up external resources |

### Use Case Descriptions

> - **During onboarding** - when a user requests a new appstudio tier namespace, the tier template includes two [Environments], and two [DTCs]. The [Environments] reference the [DTCs]. The [DTCs] bear a request for the `devsandbox` [DTCLS]. The devsandbox provisioner responds to that request and generates a `SpaceRequest`, ultimately resulting in a new namespace for each environment. The spacerequest controller provisions a serviceaccount in the new namespace and places a kubeconfig including the token for this serviceaccount in the origin namespace. The `SpaceRequest` in the origin namespace is updated to reference that `Secret` and is marked ready by the `SpaceRequest` controller. The devsandbox deployment target provisioner controller sees that and creates the devsandbox [DT] referencing the `Secret` and marks the devsandbox [DT] as ready. The deployment target binder sees that, and attaches the new [DTs] to the [DTCs]. The environment controller sees this and creates a [GitOpsDeploymentManagedEnvironment] that references the `Secret` found from traversing from the [Environment] to the [DTC] to the [DT].

Reviewer 4: Instead of introducing a devsandbox provisioner and the SpaceRequest API/Controller : 
Could we implement a "free-tier-osd-provisioner" controller which takes a pool of OSDs and gets us namespaces ? The same could be used against Sandbox OSD clusters too, what do you think ?

Author: Yes, although the provisioner needs to be coded to manage specific kinds of external resources. The devsandbox provisioner described here knows specifically how to create and manage `SpaceRequests`. If we want to get namespaces from another pool of OSD clusters that are _not_ managed by codeready toolchain operators, then we'll need a provisioner that knows how to do that _without_ `SpaceRequests`. The proposal gives us freedom to implement one or both, exposing each as different `DeploymentTargetClasses`.

FWIW, we already have devsandbox member clusters available and assuming that the SpaceRequest API really will be implemented - I think we should build against it for the first provisioner implementation.

Reviewer 3: > Could we implement a "free-tier-osd-provisioner" controller which takes a pool of OSDs and gets us namespaces 

This is basically what Dev Sandbox does in nutshell :)
So, you are asking if instead of using Dev Sandbox we could re-implement dev sandbox in the "free-tier-osd-provisioner". Of course we could. But why? :)

Reviewer 6: > we could re-implement dev sandbox in the "free-tier-osd-provisioner". Of course we could. But why? :) 

So customers could create private "devsandboxes" the same way WE do as part of a BYOC cluster pool they want to control ? Otherwise our devsandbox is provisioned/configured in a special way and differently than the perhaps customers would try to create their own free-tier thing.  Why do we need two ways to do it ?

Reviewer 4: > if we want to get namespaces from another pool of OSD clusters that are not managed by codeready toolchain operators, then we'll need a provisioner that knows how to do that without SpaceRequests.

Yes, this ^

My reframed question is, should we implement a provisioner that is generic enough to be used for provisioning namespaces from devsandbox OSDs / non-devsandbox OSDs ( or even non-openshift clusters ). How significant would that effort be ? We'll need to do that anyway sooner than later.

Reviewer 3: Sandbox already provide a lot of useful functionality which such a provisioner would need to re-implement. SpaceRequest API is our next step towards making Sandbox is even more generic and flexible so it can be used as "Namespace as a Service" in more use cases, such as the namespace provisioner to create/manage namespaces in different types of clusters (control plane clusters, workload clusters, etc).

It's not only about provisioning a namespace. We need a service which would provide and *manage* namespaces in a fleet of clusters. It's not that trivial.

- **For manual creation of new Environments** - a user submits a form in HAC which creates a new Environment CR and a new [DTC] CR. The Environment CR references the [DTC] CR, which is reconciled as in the previous bullet.
- **For automated testing in ephemeral environments** - a user specifies an IntegrationTestScenario CR with an existing Environment to clone. After a build completes, but before it executes tests, the integration-service creates a new Environment CR and a new [DTC] CR with the devsandbox [DTCLS] as above, and references the [DTC] from the Environment. The integration-service should delete the [DTC] once the environment isn’t needed anymore for the test.

> - **BYO cluster** - A user creates a [DT] and a [DTC] and `Secret`. The [DT] has the details and a reference to the secret used to connect to his/hers cluster. In addition, it contains the name of the [DTC] it should be bounded to. The user then refer to the [DTC] from the Environment that should use it.

Author: Only to satisfy API requirements - because the Environment expects a DTC (just like a pod expects a pvc). In a way, it is API overhead.

- Opens the possibility to create [DeploymentTargetClaims] in advance and by that reducing the waiting time for an ephemeral environment for testing.
- The design is similar to the design of storage in k8s, so it should look familiar to developers and users.
- We have a larger API surface than we might ultimately need. Users won’t experience this in the UI, but API-based users will face apparent complexity. The fact that this design emulates the concepts in the k8s storage API should reduce the cognitive load this might impose on users and our engineers.

## Phases of implementation

An addendum about what features can be left out until later iterations.

### Phase 0 (Path to MVP)

For our "MVP" target in early CY23, we're going to ignore the details of this proposal. It sketches
an architecture that we only want to roll out between MVP and Service Preview.

### Phase 1

The result of this phase is automation that binds [DT] and [DTC], and automatically provisions
an environment on the Sandbox cluster (using the
[SpaceRequest
API](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uqgghk1lN9dyoBLsvn5YD443TwKrsKHU6fvfUuo84Hs/edit#)) and
creates a [DT].

> - Ceate the [DT], [DTC], and [StorageClass] CRDs and make them available.

Author: Yes! Fixing.
